foreign
uh well thank you for having me on your
show um
we so i should first say that um
i'm well known as an oncologist but my
main training is as a viral immunologist
i
my phd is in viral immunology in fact my
lab
still works on viruses and immunology
not coronaviruses but other viruses
and of course there are many
similarities across many viruses so
so that is why i've i've been thinking
about this problem and been
very involved with this problem for a
while i'm part of um
the new york state uh governor's
commission on
uh sort of the postcovid response
response
among other many other committees and of
course i'm a doctor in new york and so
i've seen the pandemic
move through patients and colleagues and
nurses um
in in the most front front line manner
so with that background uh let me um say
a few things about coronavirus in
particular
or cyrus cove ii in particular that make
it a
an especially difficult
um a virus to deal with the
um the first thing is that
viruses are characterized by uh the
level of infectivity that they have
uh in other words how many people if
you're infected yourself
how many people would you can you infect
potentially
um some viruses like measles
is a good example have a very high
degree of infectivity
and so um you know one person with
measles can
infect four or five people uh with
with measles and of course if you infect
more than
one person the number rises
exponentially
um coronaviruses
have a high degree of infectivity um
and that number is not as high as
measles but it's a very high degree so
if you if
without any in a general population that
is not immune to the corona
do cyrus cov2 the degree of infectivity
is is high that's that's one reason
the second reason is that and that is uh
an extremely complex reason that is that
there are many people who are
asymptomatic
uh who do not have symptoms of
coronavirus
who still can infect other people now
this is a very unusual
feature of of this virus um it is
unlike uh for instance a virus such as
ebola where you have uh you develop
symptoms
and so you know that you're carrying the
virus and therefore you can isolate
and potentially quarantine such patients
or isolate
and quarantine yourself but this virus
doesn't seem to have
have that property in fact asymptomatic
transmission
is now known to be one of the major
sources
of transmission of uh cyrus cove two
in this covic-19 pandemic
and thirdly we do not fully understand
the immune response to this virus we are
beginning to understand
the immune response to this virus the
classical way that one designs a vaccine
against any virus is to study the immune
response
and develop typically something
that will elicit antibodies against the
virus
the bizarre thing that we're finding out
about coronaviruses this is from data
that came out even yesterday
and day before yesterday is that in
most patients the virus causes
a relatively self-limited illness
in other words you feel sick many people
know the symptoms you lose
a sense of smell you can lose a sense of
taste it infects the lung
cells and infects your respiratory
epithelium
in most cases uh this resolves in the
over the course of 10 to 14 days
although during that time you might be
spreading or transmitting
the virus however in some cases
patients for reasons that we don't
understand do not
raise an appropriate immune response
against the virus
uh they raise a dysfunctional immune
response against this virus
uh this immune response is characterized
we now know by the inability to mount
a particular kind of signal called an
interferon particularly some kinds of
interferons
patients do not generate these
and then they progress to a severe
disease so that's one problem
and we think that in the second phase or
in the very late phase of the infection
it's not not even the interferons that's
the problem your body
generates a storm of signals it
overreacts or has a hyper reactive uh
quality uh it's been described as immune
misfiring
uh it's like giving someone a gun and
the gun
instead of shooting the right target
shoots all sorts of targets around it
and makes a
big mess um this is probably the cause
of this uh diffuse pneumonia and sepsis
that
accompanies uh the viral infection in
some patients
and that is the severest form of the of
the infection
so to summarize these three qualities
one that it has a high degree of
infectivity
number two that asymptomatic individuals
can carry the virus and infect other
people
and therefore cannot be identified
isolated and quarantined
and number three that we still don't
understand
uh the immune response to the virus but
to some extent the immune response in
some individuals
happens to be uh happens to be
dysfunctional
these three qualities make it a very
unusual virus
and a very uh a virus that spreads fast
and uh therefore can cause a uh such a
terrifying pandemic
um
well it depends on what you mean by
imbalance
but i would say that there are two the
pandemic has revealed
two great vulnerabilities or two great
weaknesses
and i will talk about them separately
because they're really quite separate
things
number one is that it's revealed the
idea that
in general the world's capacity
to handle pandemics is is much poorer
than we had anticipated
the during many phases of this pandemic
the important institutions such as the
world health organization and the uh
in america the center for diseases
control had the opportunity
to contain the pandemic uh in fact uh
right from the beginning right from the
very first day
uh there was an imbalance and you could
call it a political imbalance or a
medical imbalance
between the between the
severity of this virus and our public
health response to it
um the wuhan uh
authorities uh should have been
more should have had more higher degree
of alacrity instead of trying to
suppress the information
they should have uh uh launched their
uh they should have been more open about
the severity
uh of what happened they still have not
been actually open we still don't know
exactly how the pandemic originated and
how it spread
and there's been resistance there's been
a constant level of resistance
um to find out um so so that
so right from the beginning uh all the
way to the who and to the cdc
uh i would say a series of mistakes were
made
which should not have been made and uh
our capacity
uh overall globally um to
fight pandemics has been uh revealed as
quite weak
and this you might call is a is an
imbalance of a political imbalance a
political
uh a lack of uh
appropriate uh measures to
control a pandemic that was in in this
beginning
in fact had this pandemic being
appropriately controlled
uh at the very beginning we would not
have been seeing
the terrifying consequences across the
world and it was not
um the second is that there is as i just
referred to you
um there is the virus
this particular virus um also causes
we now know a very peculiar
imbalance in the immune response to it
and that peculiar imbalance we have
begun to understand
but it's also highlighted the idea that
although
we are nearly looking at a century or
nearly 100 years
of research in immunology we still
don't understand fundamental aspects of
viral immunology
and vaccine development in a way that we
really should you know 100 years or 150
years since we
have understood the immune system we do
not understand some fundamental features
of it
i'll give you some examples one example
i just gave you
is that for reasons that we don't really
understand
there is a this virus causes
a peculiar immune dysfunction
in fact an immune dysfunction that has
been seen really before
in patients who have been treated with
uh
a particular kinds of uh cancer
therapies that involve
um bone marrow transplantation for
instance or
t cell transplantation the virus
for some reason this release of
uh of these factors these inflammatory
inflammation is very reminiscent of
a similar situation that we've seen in
in in experimental treatments for cancer
involving t cells this response
is i was unexpected we have just begun
to learn about it
and it reminds us that us that there are
fundamental features of immunology
and vaccine development that we still
don't know so far and i'm happy to
discuss this uh these
uh unknowns uh in greater detail as we
so yes so um that's an important
question um
i was among the first to raise the idea
of viral dosimetry
um in a in an article that i wrote
originally in the new yorker and then
subsequently in many interviews um
uh we have we the answer is we don't
know and we
in the middle of the pandemic it is
impossible to measure
now for many other viruses including
measles
there is a relationship between the dose
of the virus that you receive
the chance that you will get infection
and the severity of the infection
we do not know this for coronavirus um
but but what we do know is that this is
true for several other
respiratory viruses and in fact the
mechanism by which we can prevent
receiving higher doses of virus at the
first place
is of course to do one number one is
to keep a social distance and number two
is to wear masks which will
which may not reduce the entire dose of
the virus but may reduce it tenfold or
even
you know more depending on the kind of
mask that you wear
so um based on previous experiences with
other respiratory viruses
we have uh thought think we think that
it's likely
that whether or not you get an infection
has something to do
with the amount of virus that you uh
actually get exposed to
but there is no direct study that i know
of in
coronavirus um the indirect studies
uh would suggest that this might be the
case because
um one thing that you might know is that
people who are getting exposed to very
high doses of the virus such as
front-line healthcare workers doctors
and nurses
even young doctors and nurses are
succumbing or have succumbed to a very
severe variant of the disease
now this is not proof this is an
incidental finding but even
you remember right from the beginning
even in wuhan the ophthalmologist
who first described the cases of
coronavirus ultimately died
of coronavirus infection so this is not
direct proof we have not we had we don't
have a
uh a kind of controlled study
but the uh but the evidence if you look
at the evidence especially looking at
uh frontline healthcare workers who
receive very high doses
of virus because they are seeing
patients who are very sick
and are emitting higher doses of virus
the fact that even
young frontline workers i have died in
this
would suggest that the dose of the virus
has something to
do with the uh with the with the chances
of getting the infection
and with the severity of infection but
that said we do not have direct
evidence that that is the case
the imbalance has been
has been very obvious places that have
been the worst affected are places where
there has not been
a clear national program and a clear
health service
this is the way to handle the pandemic
is to really have a working government
and have a working task force
that can handle these issues at a
national level
it cannot be piecemeal or patched
together even countries like the united
states where there's a lot of resources
are struggling especially because our
system of healthcare is uh is not
regulated at a national level
and our because we are a
federation uh states have a lot of
control individual control about what to
do and what not to do
and that has not worked in our favor uh
in in the united states um
to give you one example um individual
governors of individual states
have a lot of discretion around what to
do whether to open schools to open
businesses to keep businesses open
how how
severely or how much they will intervene
on
on people to keep you know masks on
and keep public safety measures on in
the united states
that has been relegated to individual
states
and if you don't have a national policy
and if it's not consistent
that is a that that becomes a huge
problem
in the united states uh again we've seen
that
people who don't have access to
information
people who are living in crowded
conditions people who
are front line workers and people who
don't have adequate protection using
for instance masks there is now growing
evidence
that these patients these people are
disproportionately
affected and in fact in the united
states
african americans and hispanics
have been disproportionately affected by
coronavirus
and it's an instance of a of the
political
and public health mayhem
that happens when you don't have a
centralized system
uh or you know have a decentralized
system
uh which uh which allows individual
governors and individual states
to make individual decisions the
countries that have done well
uh in comparison have highly centralized
systems they have imposed
lockdowns they have really
imposed uh very strict lockdowns
often under uh supervision by the army
or the military
um they have impro imposed uh
as they have imposed strong uh travel
bans
um especially from other countries where
the infection load is very high
and they have really imposed strong
quarantines
and there has been a consistent message
not a
diffuse message across so
um what we are seeing here i think is a
an example where a uh
if a if uh to attack a pandemic
you need a uh a supervised
uh task force and not
a patchwork or a diffuse uh
system
well one thing that has been a problem
is
you've correctly identified the problem
one thing that is that we've seen is
that there has been
a rapid publication
now that has many advantages that allows
it allows
scientific and medical news to get out
quickly
the problem on the other hand is that it
also allows
false scientific information to get out
quickly
we've seen this uh now several times uh
not only in the uh some scientific
articles that have not been reviewed and
carefully
tested by other researchers but also in
the in scientific fraud uh that happened
with
uh with a paper uh around
hydroxychloroquine
uh which had to be retracted um so we've
seen both of these
um i think the the general message uh
here is
that the process by which
scientists evaluate each other's work is
too slow
especially it does not keep pace with a
pandemic
and during pandemic times it probably is
worthwhile to
create a different system because
uh you do know you cannot rely on the
slowness
of the of the scientists
to review this work so the
one answer is again to create a
um a group of scientists with
appropriate incentives
um so that they can review the work
more faster comment on it
check its accuracy and then allow it to
be
uh move it to a preprint so basically
put another filter or a layer
of governance around this
these scientists will have to be
incentivized somehow to do this they
will have to
be um able to do this and of course
there's an element of public service
uh in all of this but it has exposed the
problems of open review or non-review
publications
and we need in for the planning for the
future
i think uh the scientific community is
very aware
that this is a problem and that they
should try to fix it
put forward
yes so you're raising a very important
point
i can tell you what we have done and
what i think many other
places have tried to do we have carved
out separate
places within the hospital where cancer
treatment can continue
during the middle of the pandemic it's
not easy
it requires a very intensive
surveillance and testing
um basically in those words
uh where patients are undergoing
chemotherapy
um there you you cannot enter those
words without a
test uh and uh if unless you're tested
negative
and patients who are um who have cancer
and who happen to have a covert
infection unfortunately
have to wait until they have been tested
negative to be able to re-enter the
words
so we and others have really sealed uh
to add the best
at or to the best of our abilities um
healthcare workers and patients to
ensure that they are covered negative
and that their normal cancer care can
continue
uh patients with chemotherapy and
compromised immune systems obviously
have
a greater danger of getting
complications from
uh uh from covid19
and so we have been especially careful
um in monitoring those patients
monitoring their symptoms
asking them to maintain isolation uh
doing uh you know asking them to
maintain masks and hand hygiene
and be to be especially vigilant
and to be honest we have
been able to i would say mostly
deliver the appropriate cancer care
to patients in cases where
surgery was or cancer therapy could have
been delayed
for entirely valid reasons we have
pushed those back uh
in cases where it was uh impossible
we've still continued as best we could
uh using all of these things testing
sealing the facility and ensuring that
it's clean
and really really separating out
the covered words from the from the
cancer words
as much as possible
is
ways so the
uh the evidence is as follows there is
not
one single appropriately conducted
randomized study on covert 19
that shows that hydroxychloroquine in
combination
or not in combination with other
medicine works
i'm going to repeat that there is not
one
single appropriately done randomized
study
that shows hydroxychloroquine works
it does not seem to work in the early
setting it does not seem to work in the
middle setting
it does not seem to work in the late
setting of a covet infection
so the use of this drug at present
uh can only be considered uh
investigational
and therefore not recommended as routine
practice
uh if there's a trial that shows that
the drug works
the entire medical community will be
eager to embrace it
um but right now there is no such uh
study
that has been published or is in
existence um
the quicker that we acknowledge that uh
the
the quicker the field can move along i'm
not against no one is against
studying uh this drug or i don't have
any bias i would like to have this drug
work
um i'm sure my patients would like to
have it work
all that we know right now is that
multiple studies have been launched
multiple
high quality studies have been launched
and in every case
we have not found any efficacy or any
proof of efficacy for this drug so
to uh for any president
who is not a medical professional to uh
decide that this drug works is a is
really doing a disservice i think to the
medical profession
the medical profession is not asked
to comment on how to run the presidency
the presidency should not uh decide how
to run the medical profession
um i do see a relationship between the
uh the the the populism
and the anti-scientific discourse um
the erosion of of trust in science is
evident in all three pla in all three
countries these are
large populist countries led by populist
leaders whose initial reaction uh
to the uh viral infection uh
was a to a large extent um
you know it will go away let's not worry
about it
this was less true in india india did
impose an
early lockdown and has continued to
impose an early lockdown
india also happens to be you know among
the most crowded
uh of of these countries
and of course have has the largest
population uh
compared to these three countries uh but
there is an anti-science sentiment in
india as well there is a
promotion by lots of people of various
unscientific
uh theories about the virus and that has
caught the imagination
uh of of a of a lot of people so
um i think it is not a coincidence that
in three countries led by sort of
populist leaders who have tried to
take over the medical profession and
tried to
i would say to some extent uh bully the
medical profession
into things that uh are really not
um uh uh appropriate
um uh has shown um
terrible results um the
the this of
virus demanded and continues to demand
uh leadership um and a particular kind
of leadership
a leadership that is willing to accept
that that
that as a political leader you are not
medically informed and that you should
appoint the very best
medical team to be a task force and
enable even if you have a
federal system enable that medical task
force
to make strong recommendations and then
follow those recommendations and not
undermine them um as um
as our president and um and others have
done
so um it has exposed i think the
idea that the
not having the appropriate leadership
in place is can be very harmful
uh i think it's possible um
it's important to realize that just
having a vaccine doesn't solve the
problem
you have to get vaccinated to solve the
problem and that's a different thing
so just having a vaccine isn't enough
you have to produce enough doses
people have to take it people have to be
given the appropriate doses
and the vaccine has to be above all safe
and effective
i think moving as fast as we can it's
possible
to have a vaccine by early next year
it will not be as rigorously tested as
most vaccines have just to give you a
sense
the last vaccine that was fastest
vaccine human vaccine
ever developed in human history has been
four years
and that's the mumps vaccine um
the this would be
reducing that four years down to uh
essentially one and a half years
and or one year and a few months
and even with the latest technologies
making vaccine in that record time
is really a challenge
i am optimistic because i have seen the
data and studied the data from
all the vaccine groups that have
published data so far this includes the
group at oxford
uh working on the on the vaccine that's
based on the
adenovirus chimpanzee backbone
uh this is based on uh the moderna
vaccine that is a
vaccine based on a very new technology
and it's also based on other vaccines
that are being that are coming
the data look promising the data look
good from
uh human and animal experiments but
these are not finalized data
the vaccines are undergoing trials right
now in fact
um two or three of the lead candidates
are almost finishing with their trials
but that said this will these trials
will
be among the fastest trials that we've
done and there's a compromise here the
compromise is that
if you don't wait for the the
appropriate length of trials
you do have to make a compromise because
you won't have studied
uh all the potential long-term effects
of of such a vaccine
but thus far uh the ones that have the
data that have been published have been
encouraging
um and i would say if this trend
continues
and if we keep on track we might have a
vaccine by
uh early next year would be my
projection
a
uh no i don't think it's necessary to
break the patent of vaccines
i i'm not sure i completely agree with
the conspiracy idea that
pharmaceutical companies are out to
basically make patients dependent on
drugs
i do agree with the idea that many drugs
are priced at an expense that patients
cannot afford
and there has to be a recalibration but
i'm not a believer
in the conspiracy theory that
pharmaceutical the pharmaceutical
industry is out
to basically make you dependent on a
drug um
in fact if anything the pharmaceutical
industry has been
the leader in vaccine production you
cannot
make a vaccine without the help of the
pharmaceutical industry because
it requires things like safe violin
how do you put a sterile vial and and
manufacture it
and then distribute it across the globe
if necessary
i do not think that the vaccines will
need to break patent
uh however i do think that they have to
be priced
uh appropriately so that you know we can
vaccinate
50 60 70 percent of the globe at a very
great cost
um the uh as you very well know
uh the american government has released
uh as well as other governments have
released vast amounts of funds
for the vaccines to be manufactured
tested
and deployed appropriately several
billion dollars have gone into this
already
and uh pharmaceutical companies
themselves have put up
uh several billion dollars at risk uh in
the development of these vaccines so i'm
i have to say that i that i have not
been a critic
of the pharmaceutical industry in this
vaccine development program in fact if
anything they have
cooperated cooperated extensively with
the
federal agencies in developing vaccines
now that said
it is a separate conversation whether in
general
patented drugs um have now reached a
place where their
expenses is becoming a deterrent to
patients being able to get these drugs
that is a separate conversation from the
vaccine conversation we can have that
i'm a believer that they have that that
the appropriate balance has been
uh lost uh but uh all of this said
uh in the on the vaccine development i
don't think that there has been a
conspiracy or lack of enthusiasm
by the pharma pharma companies in fact
if anything they have been
among the leaders of the production of
the vaccine and to be honest
i cannot imagine how you could produce a
vaccine
for the bulk population for large
populations
without the help of the pharma companies
we just don't know
we don't have the infrastructure or the
apparatus
to be able to safely for instance make a
vial of the vaccine that is sterile that
does not have contaminants
that is manufactured according to the
highest level of
safety standards etc outside the
pharmaceutical industry we just don't
have the infrastructure
to suddenly wake up and say oh you know
we'll make the vaccine ourselves
is
well one uh thing that the pandemic has
exposed
uh very clearly is that
for essential equipment such as
masks and ventilators we
cannot depend on a pipeline of
production
that is so highly dependent on china
that when the chinese system collapses
or is unable to provide
that the entire global system also
collapses with it
there are certain goods which have to
have
be stockpiled and
of course no one likes stockpiling
because
it means waste but we've learned that
having a stockpile for instance of
of masks and of ventilators would have
been very helpful because they could
have been deployed
much more easily number two is for
certain things it may be better to have
local manufacturers that can be scaled
up
the idea that i've proposed many times
and including in the new yorker article
is to essentially
uh run what would be like production
drills uh just like you run a fire drill
uh to
ensure that if there's a fire in the
building people are prepared they know
exactly what to do
um and they can uh in in the case of a
production drill
the question is how quickly can you
scale up production
locally um so i'll give you a particular
um a particular example as you can
imagine
the um the united states has the
capacity had the capacity
previously to produce high quality n95
masks
but over the last several years we have
moved that capacity
over to china so that when we really
needed masks we couldn't produce them
anymore
um the the part of the answer to this
conundrum
is to basically for the government
for federal agencies to pre-authorize
production facilities and ensure that
these production facilities have
the capacity to expand if they need to
expand
and that they are not dependent on a
single good
uh or a single product the failure of
which
will make the entire system uh fall down
so in other words
to build in redundancies and
resiliencies
for what would be considered essential
goods to manage
any medical crisis so that includes
for any infectious medical crisis that
would include
appropriate protective gear for
frontline healthcare workers that would
have prevented
all these infections in frontline
healthcare workers and made the hospital
safe
and also made the nursing home safe as
you might know
a vast fraction of the deaths in the
united states
uh were in nursing homes and that was
because these nursing homes were
operating on very thin budgets
and they were just not safe for for
their residents so um we
we cannot depend uh on other countries
uh because when those countries
themselves are in a crisis
the entire production chain uh collapses
and there is no resilience or redundancy
built into the chain so
all of this will be reviewed in the
post-pandemic world
and i hope that there will be a
mechanism by which we can
assign certain essential medical goods
um
to the uh to the appropriate
well i think the um i i think uh there
are really two questions there one is
that uh you know
are what should be done to international
institutions in the post-pandemic world
i think the if anything uh at least to
me
the pandemic has uh only re-emphasized
the importance of uh global institutions
uh that they need to be approached
appropriately funded but also need to be
appropriately monitored
um the failure of appropriate monitoring
results
in the absence or the inappropriateness
with which we are seeing um this
pandemic being managed
as far as genetics is concerned again um
you know the genetics is a an ethically
complicated subject
but it has many advantages i mean
obviously
um the the way we test for
uh this virus the way we are using
uh pcr um or the way that we
um the way that we have made vaccines
using
other viruses and and joining together
pieces of dna
is really the legacy of of a century
of genetic research this research is
very powerful
it can be life-saving in this case
the production of vaccines the
production of antibodies
the production of detection tests all of
these
depend on genetic techniques on our
understanding of genetics
and so it illustrates how important
important genetics is not just to fields
like cancer
or other diseases but really its
importance to
infectious diseases and to the pandemic
but it also illustrates that being so
powerful
this is a field that needs to be highly
regulated
and if anything the international
bodies uh need to
be more empowered rather than less
empowered to the
to be able to appropriately
do genetic testing and be regulated
in the future
intervals
that's a nice question um there is a
book that is coming before that
so there are two books that are coming
before the book on death um
one of them is um will be published by
compania
it will be a history of cell biology
and include a history of immunology
inside it
and there's a separate chapter inside
that called pandemic
which is based on some of the writings
that i've done in the new yorker and the
new york times magazine
um and it will talk about some of these
issues that we
just we've been discussing what do we
understand about the cell biology of the
immune system how do we
what is what is a history what is the
history of vaccination vaccine
development
uh much of that will be in that book uh
in fact
a small extract of that has already been
published
that will be followed i think by an
updated version of the emperor of all
maladies
and then after that will come the book
on death which has not been
fully announced yet um that is how i'm
thinking about it
uh for now but uh you know people's
plans change and
and there are new directions um
i should say that um my laboratory or
our laboratory has invented
a uh promising new way
to potentially cure leukemia
um we announced this uh quite recently
and that has now become a
um is entering clinical trials
um if i think there is a fascinating
book to be
written about that process um
so somewhere in the middle i might
change my mind and and put that book
third or fourth
i haven't made those decisions yet
uh
well of course in general um i think
it's important it's become more
important now
so about five years ago um
the chances that you would get a genetic
test and get something useful
out of that genetic test if you did not
have
quite unusual or rare diseases um
the genetic tests were not very useful
um we are slowly finding out that
um genetic tests can be useful
in the medical setting i'll give you an
example i'll give you a couple of
examples
um one example is
uh the history of heart disease
it turns out that for the last five or
six years
um doing you know doing a genetic test
to figure out if you had a higher risk
of
uh of uh coronary disease this is
disease that
that causes heart attacks um was not
very useful
but now using new methods
that have been developed in the lab we
can predict
your risk of coronary disease and the
future risk of having a heart attacks
using not one gene but really hundreds
if not thousands of genes
each of which contributes a little bit
of risk but if you accumulate them all
together
uh all the variants together you can now
really get a sense of risk
that's true for some diseases i give you
one example
heart attacks a second example is breast
cancer
so again
there were patients with um
obviously there's some genes that
increase the risk of breast cancer
genes like brca1 and brca2
but there were many women who had
neither mutations or changes in brca1 or
brca2
but who had a high risk of breast cancer
and this was a big question for the
medical field why do they have a high
risk of breast cancer
and we now know that part of that risk
not all of it but part of it is because
of genetics
and much like heart disease it's not one
gene but
small risks that accumulate over
uh many genes hundreds if not thousands
of genes
so i would say that we are making
progress
in the usefulness of genetic tests
beyond just
unusual and rare diseases into much more
common diseases such as heart attacks
and um and breast cancer
i should also say that there have been
now multiple projects
trying to figure out whether
you you can predict your risk of
developing
severe covet infection based on genetic
sequencing
of of yourself of patients
and thus far nothing has really stood
out
except for a couple of studies one
dutch study which had very few
patients these dutch investigators
took young brothers brother pairs
so families in which two young brother
pairs both developed very severe covet
as you can imagine that's very unusual
because generally speaking
young men or and women but young people
in general don't tend to develop severe
covid
so they looked through their hospital
databases and found
two families in which they had two
brothers
living separately and both the brothers
developed very severe they were both
young
under 35 uh and both the brothers
developed severe covert in fact one of
them died one of the four
died uh of kobe and they sequenced the
genes
and surprisingly they found that there
was one
gene that seems to be uh altered or
mutated in all four
of these individuals the chance
chance that that happens by pure chance
alone is very low
and this gene is in fact related it's an
immune system gene
so um and in and has been previously
shown
to have a relationship between our
capacity to be resistant to
viral infections so these kinds of
projects are very informative because
they can tell us
they can identify patients who are at
higher risk for developing severe
covit that's one but more importantly
they can
illuminate or tell us how the immune
system's reaction to covid
can guide us towards therapies what
therapies we need and in fact
some of the therapies that people are
developing around the world in fact some
of the therapies that we are developing
uh in the lab are is based on these
insights
um from these genetic studies
well that's a nice question um i try
to keep the interest by first of all by
being interested myself uh if you're not
interested in
in writing or discovering or doing the
research that involves writing
then it's unlikely you'll ever interest
anyone else so
i approach the books as if with the the
excitement
of the very first time i learned about
mitochondria
uh that same excitement uh in
in researching in understanding should
come through in the book
that's one principle and the second
thing is um
i try to use language that is
simple but is does not
make the make it um uh
you know in america we call it dumb down
um
the science um you
um i think the general approach that
i've taken and
there were lots of critics when i first
started writing my book but the general
approach that i've taken is that
a lay audience is actually an extremely
sophisticated audience
the public um you know if you don't
know what you're writing about or
talking about a
very astute reader or any reader will
also
know in a second that you don't that you
haven't done the work
so you have to really be convinced
yourself
and have the confidence to be able to
tell the story
and it's only when you have that
confidence you find that you can
actually tell the story in simple
language
science is just a language it is
a wonderful language but it's a language
it has some jargon inside it but you can
get rid of the jargon
and once you have gotten rid of the
jargon
i think the public is really hungry to
understand i mean people are hungry to
understand about cobit
they are hungry to understand why this
pandemic happened what is this virus
where did it come from what is it going
to do to us
yeah so in fact this is even more a time
when we need writers and thinkers to
think about science and explain it to
the public
so that the erosion of public trust in
science
that has been spearheaded by
you know populist government officials
can be restored and the public learns to
trust science again
um yes very much so so i think that um
and this goes back to the uh
another question that was asked before
about um
resilience in medical systems so i think
that
essential systems like medicine
defense um
food production things that are
essential for that for
a nation to be safe and to work
need to have built into them a certain
degree
of slack or
resilience and by slack i mean that
it should not be operating we in
in most businesses we have begun to
operate
with the thinnest possible margin and
the least possible waste
in order to maximize profits and to make
the most efficient
systems the most efficient systems have
unfortunately uh the property that they
can be compromised in their ability
because they are so reliant on
efficiency they can compromise they can
be compromised
in their ability to have um
resilience because there is there is no
waste so if
one part is missing all of a sudden the
entire production line
goes to a halt and so
we need to one thing we need to
understand
is how to
i would say how to relax and
by relax i mean uh in a in a very
thoughtful manner how we might be able
to design
systems that have built into them
some capacity such that if there is a
break
um in the in the production line that
they can recover from the production
line and it
usually means sacrificing some of the
efficiency and
leanness with which these businesses are
run so they
we have to identify the ones that are
essential and i named some of them
medicine food production
defense strategy transportation
the movement of essential goods etc all
of these that
our people rely on for their
i would say for their you know essential
necessities have to build in uh systems
of slack
um one example that i often give in
um i gave in the new yorker article
was toyota the company toyota
suffered a very bad uh fire
and essentially almost uh the company
was almost
uh eradicated because one essential part
of of the toyota cars uh
became it was impossible they didn't
produce it
what they learned from that is that they
had to create systems
by which that part uh was
appropriately uh distributed in its
production
so that they wouldn't be reliant on a
single
pipeline or a single choke point in that
pipeline
because if that choke point has a hazard
of some sort of fire
then the entire production ceases so
this is true for every company but it's
particularly true for
companies or governments that are
providing
essential goods and one of the
compromises that you have to make
in order to create resilience or slack
is a compromise
in efficiency because you know it's much
more efficient of course to produce
just one part in one place um and maybe
you
are producing it very cheaply in china
uh the problem is that if that factory
in china has a problem
say and you know in this case a national
pandemic such that
all of a sudden either the factory isn't
functioning or they're not able to
export
goods anymore then all of a sudden
you're stuck without ventilators
that means that that system didn't have
or doesn't have
an appropriate degree of resilience and
it needs to be measured that is a
measurable quantity
and for essential medical goods
essential goods
we need to be able to measure it and
when it falls below the measure
we need to have interventions federal
interventions that allow us to uh
return it back to its normal state with
a little bit of slack
voltage
well until we have a vaccine i think
this cycle of quarantines will go
on um the only way out really is
to this there is a a short way out
is to have better medicines against the
virus
and several are coming um they're in
very advanced phase trials
but there are several that are coming
one of them is an are some antibodies
not vaccines but these are human-made
antibodies against
uh the virus it won't they don't last
you know
forever they only last about a month but
at least
that is a temporary solution
the vaccine is the long-term solution
the good news is that this virus at
least until now doesn't seem to show a
very
high level of mutation high rate of
mutation
so in that sense it's unlike some
viruses
that show an enormous amount of mutation
um and so they um
uh i don't and i'm hoping that
there will not be a large number there
are viral mutants uh
there's no doubt about it but the number
of viral mutations that we've
found thus far hasn't seemed to be
enormous
and so i'm hoping that that will not be
a limitation of the vaccine
but that the vaccine will be able to
take care of you know virtually
most of the patients but until we have
the vaccine
or even some effective drugs against the
virus
we are still in the middle of this cycle
of quarantine and locked down and shut
down
and there is and of course there is no
way around it one way around it is
masking
the entire the entire i mean one thing
that people don't realize is that
there is one value one number
which dictates whether the virus is
going to grow exponentially or it's
going to die exponentially
and that is the number of people that
you
as an infected carrier infect this
so-called r naught or r zero if it is
above one then the virus grows
exponentially
if it is below one the virus decays
so how do you prevent you from one
person from infecting more than one
person
well masking isolation quarantine
distancing and of course vaccination
so right now all of those things are the
only things that we have
this is why we keep re-emphasizing and
emphasizing the value of masks
because that is uh crucial to the
um to the
uh protection of people against
the virus this is why we emphasize the
value of
quarantine and social distancing
all which are crucial to reducing that
value
are zero below one if the value of r0
falls below one
then you can have local breakouts but
essentially the virus
will die
by an exponential decay that is a
mathematical logic
of all viruses and there is no uh
there's no there's no way around it
uh
well i have a full library library
behind me so um
you know i have probably
you know 2 000 books here so it's a
little hard to recommend one over the
other right
um what is a good book that i'm reading
um
here um
there's a this this lovely book by zadie
smith
called swing time uh that i think is
quite nice has nothing to do with the
pandemic
um i like reading essays
um so here is a nice book of
uh essays uh from
uh uh edited by david foster wallace in
um and in fact has a
very nice essay by cynthia ozek called
out from xanadu which people might want
to read
next to that is my all-time favorite
writer alice monroe
this book is called too much happiness
there is a lovely book here
um called um
by david grossman called
be my knife and above that
let's see let's see what we have here
my own book the gene uh if you want to
read that
uh that is david uh grossman be my knife
it's a lovely book
um this is a book from um
another lovely book from my uh indian
friend and colleague vikram said called
the rivered earth
which has a nice
uh note from vikram to me uh
says uh for siddhartha with
affection and true
love vikram delhi 2014
um and of course you know somewhere in
here is
camus book on the plague which many
people are revisiting
um in this plague i'm not sure what's
it is it will give you a lot of
assurance uh but at least
people are reading that um
should i continue there there are there
are more there are
two thousand books here i i live
well i think people have different
reactions to
uh their own genetic uh propensities
um i think that um
you know and we need to respect
individual decisions
she wanted to have no risk uh or
lower her risk beyond uh you know to the
lowest point
which is why she decided to have the
procedure but
some people obviously don't want to do
that there are many other options there
is the
possibility of taking drugs
to lower risk there's a possibility of
intensive monitoring to also lower risk
so i think one of the things in medicine
is to respect
the individual desires and
decisions of of individuals as long as
they are
within reason some people
you know might come up with an idea of
reducing risk that doesn't make sense
and the job of the physician there is to
really tell them that it doesn't make
sense it's not the
appropriate way to reduce risk um
one of the things i'm very hopeful about
is that
even with even patients with draca one
and this is something that the audience
might not know
we still cannot tell if even if you have
the brachawal mutation
we know that in general or on average
your risk of
getting breast cancer in your lifetime
is increased several forward maybe
10 20-fold above the general population
what would be very helpful is if we
could tell patients a little bit more
which is to say
not in general but what is your
individual risk of
having breast cancer or aggressive
breast cancer
early on in your life or having a more
less aggressive breast cancer that will
be can be surgically removed
you know later on in your life in your
70s or 80s
if we could tell that by genetic
mechanisms
by sequencing other genes i think we
would do patients a big service because
then they could choose
to have the procedure or avoid the
procedure based on a real
personal assessment of risk right now it
is a very
i would say a very uh non-granular or
a very
non-personalized assessment of risk just
one gene
and you know you can have breast cancer
early on in your life and die from it or
you can have a breast cancer that
happens
very late a small breast cancer that may
not affect your life as much
and may be easily removable by just
surgery or perhaps by chemotherapy
following surgery so so so
two principles come out of this number
one is that we
need more science to tell us about
individual risk personalized risk
and number two um i think that decision
is ultimately personal
famous for
i think one of the um things about
um pandemics that we have learned from
kovid is that
genetics is uh extremely important for
surveillance
of viruses um in the population
and it in fact has strengthened the idea
that we should be
doing appropriate surveillance um using
genetic techniques i mean one of the big
failures
that i outlined in the new yorker piece
in the united states was that for days
for about 40 days after the first case
appeared in the united states
we did not have a test um
for covid19 for osiris-cov2 the virus
that causes covid19
this is a an enormous failure um
uh we could have had a
standard who test we chose in the in the
united states we chose not to have it
we chose to make our own test and that
test didn't work for about 40 days
those 40 days was the crucial period of
time when the infection spread
and no one knew whether you had it or
didn't have it there was no testing that
was available
and therefore we had no way to
discriminate between
someone suffering from a common cold or
the flu
or asymptomatic people who had been
exposed and
uh figure out whether they had the virus
or not so
um i think that in the future
the capacity to have appropriate
surveillance and population-wide
surveillance
for new viruses when they arise is going
to be crucial
and the one thing that the pandemic has
taught us is that you
cannot be fast enough
to do the testing in other words testing
has to be
absolutely as fast as you can possibly
get
uh to the test um and even
a uh you know basically
the test has to be accurate you can't uh
you know use
an inaccurate test but uh a major
failing during this pandemic in the
united states
was that we did not have a test for
about 40 days
after the first index case was detected
in seattle
the
you